Robert Massey about the Roman arts.
This really is a departure for you in terms of technique style time.
It's a departure and a return, in a sense.
A return to journalism, which is where I began.
That's right.
You were at Newsweek, weren't you?
I was at Newsweek and the Saturday evening post.
And then I became a writer of histories and biographies and a habituator of libraries and archives and so forth.
And for this book, there wasn't anything in the libraries or archives.
I did what journalists do.
I, with the added additional sort of technological assistance of a tape recorder, which journalists now use, but in my day, 25, 30 years ago,
You just scribbled as fast as you could.
And I went everywhere, to Siberia, to Moscow, to England, in search of DNA scientists and Romanoffs and lawyers and so forth.
Was it a sense that there were loose ends that had to be tied?
Nicholas and Alexander were 67, so we're talking almost 30 years.
Well, there was the fact that the bodies had never been found.
But for you?
For me it was...
For me, I was sitting there one day working on Dreadnought II, Son of Dreadnought.
Is there a Dreadnought II?
I've done two years of work, and I'm going to go back on it.
Well, that ended the night the war began, and this next book should start the next day.
I haven't actually written anything, but I've done a lot of research.
Will that be the title, do you think?
No, no, no.
I don't know quite what... I'm sorry to jump around.
No, yeah, the problem there is the material, the dreadnoughts kind of disappear after Jutland, and it becomes a submarine war.
So I can't call it the Dreadnought War, which would be a good title.
It would be nice, wouldn't it?
As a naval officer, I can appreciate that.
I'm an old mini-bolster.
I'm not going to leave that subject, Nick, until I have a place to use the ten days I spent on the battleship in New Jersey when she was firing her 16-inch guns.
And I had spent three and a half years on aircraft carriers.
I was three and a half years on aircraft carriers.
Well, but we never saw a dreadnought, except maybe I was in the Korean War, so maybe on the horizon.
But here I was in the turrets when the guns fired.
So anyway, I want to use that material.
But one day a friend called and said, what do you think about these bones they found in Siberia?
And I said, I haven't thought much about them at all.
Well, are they real or not?
And I said, I don't know anything about them, frankly.
But you had heard something about it.
Well, I'd read just about it in the paper.
This is 91?
No, this was 93.
And they had already, they dug them up in 91.
The forensic anthropologist had already been there.
The DNA had gone, the bones had gone to England for DNA testing.
And Peter Gill, the head of the British laboratory, had said, well, we're 98.5% sure.
And...
And this person said, so do you believe that these are the bones?
Anyway, I didn't know.
I said, I don't think I'm going to get involved.
You know, it's been, I said, 20, 28 years.
But they said, well, you know, Bob, we all know about, this was somebody my wife's age, and she's quite a lot younger.
She said, we all know about this family.
We all know this story because of Nicholas and Alexandra.
And I'm fascinated by it.
I really don't understand why you are.
I can tell you something.
Somebody's going to write this book.
And if it's not you, they'll use a lot of your material.
So I said, and she had called me because she had heard Pavel Ivanov, this Russian scientist, speak in New York.
He was touring around the country.
And so what I did was to get, through my lawyer, the Nexus stuff, you know, on Romanov, Bones, Siberia.
And I got a stack of paper that high.
And I read it in chronological order, and I read it.
I thought, this is fascinating.
And I sort of began to make connections, you know, about St.
Petersburg versus Yekaterinburg, and British versus Russians, going back to the refusal to accept the family, and so on.
So I sort of said, let me see how this would work, and I wrote a kind of a
what do you call it, a proposal.
And I took it to them, and I said, I'd like to just sort of sit down and do an evaluation of this.
I was thinking of a book where I wouldn't do a whole lot of reporting, but I would collect all this material from the London Times and wherever, and sort of said, this is what this means.
You know, if true, it means that the...
that the Sokoloff report was wrong, that the bones and so forth.
But anyway, to make a long story only slightly shorter, I got involved.
I found there wasn't anything you could really grab and say, this is what happened.
I had to go out and talk to everybody.
That's fun, though.
It was great fun.
As a matter of fact, Nick, the thing I'm wrestling with now as I go around the country is, yes, I'd like to go back and do Dreadnought,
to, but before I do it, I had such a good time.
It was meeting people.
Is there anything else that I could do which I could do?
Because doing this made a lot of sense.
I did it in a relatively short time, but I had a lot of background in it.
And I don't have that much background in just anything.
I don't want to just go out and be a
a true crime reporter, be it another Joe McGinnis or whatever.
So, I don't know.
Well, you also, Joe's a point of money, but you also like to get your facts straight, too.
Get them first hand, shall we say.
I do, and also, on that subject, I can tell you that I, for the first time, encountered the New Yorkers fact-checking.
Yeah, meat grinder.
I guess it was, when I first went in, I just was appalled.
I said, she would say, how do you know this?
And I'd say, I saw it.
She'd say, yeah, but do you have any other corroboration?
I'd say, I saw it with my own eyes.
I had the same instance, and they hired a copy editor who must be elected to the order.
She was amazing.
Challenged me on everything.
And I liked it.
It was cool.
But there was one instance where I'm at this trial in Iowa.
And I'm describing this guy having Kenny Rhodes, he's the guy who turned in Steven for the bounty.
And I'm describing him having, enjoying straight up cocktails with these librarians.
And she says, who told you this?
How do you know this?
I said, I observed it.
I was there.
I was eavesdropping.
I mean, I was.
Oh, why did you say so?
Yeah.
I said, I say so by being the omniscient observer.
I was there.
That's exactly what you're saying.
And that's fun, isn't it?
But the point is that the whole sort of, from the start to the finish, of gathering the facts from the air, from the people while they're still living, is very different from writing a biography of Peter the Great.
Fantastic.
Well, reconstructing that assassination scene, as you did at the beginning.
That was based on a number of things, but most newly, the Urofsky note, which Edward Rudzinski had used, although he hadn't discovered it.
Galey Ryabov discovered it ten years before, and that helped Ryabov and Abdonin to locate the bones.
Have you met Rudzinski?
No.
Well, I did.
I went to see him in Moscow, and then I saw him again in New York.
He's a fascinating guy.
He's a playwright, and he has this kind of pixie-ish, elfin, charming,
view that facts are starting points.
But he also had access.
He trained, his university training was as an archivist.
So when he got into trouble over some of his plays, because he skated on very thin ice during the last ten years of the regime, and when he was sort of shut down, he then went back and started
reading Diaries of Nicholas II, and wrote that book.
And when I went to see him, I said, why aren't you writing this book?
I mean, because if you were, I wouldn't be, because I was out of that business.
And he was not only much more recently in it, but he was on this government commission.
I mean, he had a clear insight.
He said, and I understood clearly what he meant, he said, I can't do it anymore.
And I felt that way.
Now, I've got a question, and just because I see it and it's in your book, and if you want to tell me what this is all about, what's this all about?
Is there anything you want to tell me about?
What is this all about?
Near the end of the writing?
Is that anything that you want to see in the print, or I'm just wondering what... No, there's not anything I want to see in the print.
Okay, but I'd be glad to tell you.
I would like to know this, and it's pertinent to the author.
Okay, we're back on it.
Yeah, I'd rather you left that out.
Well, I just... It's the kind of thing that... It jumps out.
I always re-acknowled Vincent.
Yeah, yeah.
I've been asked about it before.
I'm sure.
Because it sticks out.
But you're... Because you're...
an author as well as a critic and so forth.
And you can trust me on top of all that.
It is fascinating.
Let's get back to the book, of course.
You didn't really feel like you were revisiting prior work.
I don't think there's very little overlap except for this execution scene.
And that last... It does provide a nice link, doesn't it, actually, between the books.
Well, and because this is about the sort of ending of this story, and there was a misunderstanding or just bad knowledge as to what happened, and I wanted the reader to know.
I mean, there'd be a lot of readers, I hope, for this book who hadn't read Nichols.
You would hope also that they'd go back.
Well, I think probably a lot of the readers of Nicholas Alexander are in another world.
I mean, 28 years ago... Yeah, the book's in print, isn't it?
Oh, he's still in print.
Yeah.
So, I mean, it will certainly encourage people coming to the... If this book begins to do well, I suppose it'll help that book, yeah.
It seems to me DNA makes this whole thing possible.
Absolutely.
And, of course, the end of the Cold War, that's another obvious one.
Absolutely, yeah.
Those are the two things.
And they came along in the middle 1980s.
And DNA made not only the identification of the bones possible, but the identification of Anna Anderson possible.
Explain, explain, you don't hear, but explain, for the people who read my call, how you can use DNA today for people who have been dead for all this, 16, 18 years.
You can extract the DNA...
sequence, this ACGT, these chemical sequence in which they appear in the chromosomes.
You can extract from a variety of human, as I say, parts, the bones, blood, bodily fluids, hair, and these bones which had been in the ground
really bones were all that was left, there was a little bit of hair, were the oldest bones which have ever been subjected to DNA extraction, but they did it.
But how can you say it's them?
You certainly have relatives today, right?
Oh, of course, I'm sorry, yeah.
You take the DNA sequence, you have computers, and they go to that part of a
a DNA sequence which may be miles long in terms of, you know, they were stretched out and these base pair sequences were blown up to, you know, something that was visible to the eye.
They go to the parts which are most variable between human beings.
Most of DNA separates us from vegetables and dogs and, you know, we're human beings.
But the difference
And they compare that, then they extract DNA from somebody who is known.
And it doesn't have to be somebody contemporary of, in this case, the bones.
They could be a descendant from a common ancestor.
And they can, well, let me just give you an example.
With the Empress Alexandra, her sisters, Alexandra's sister was Princess Victoria Battenberg.
Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, was her grandson, and he has the same DNA sequence as Alexandra did.
So when he agreed to give blood, they could then compare this with these bones of this 46-year-old woman, or this middle-aged woman, and these three young women, and determine that this was, since it was identical, that this was Alexandra of Hesse,
and that these three females, which had the same DNA, were her daughters.
So you had not only the sort of historical evidence, these bodies were in this site, not that far from the original grave site.
Although there were two bodies missing, the party was significantly similar to the party,
been executed and disappeared.
And then you compare the DNA and you know who it is.
Did this more or less confirm your suspicions or were there surprises?
I had accepted the Sokolov theory when Sokolov, the white investigator, got there a few hours, a few days after the murders and began to collect evidence.
He couldn't find the bodies and looked very hard for six months.
He then
first hypothesized and then declared that they'd been destroyed.
They had vanished.
And there was evidence of the massacre.
I mean, he did not believe the Soviet story that they'd killed only the Tsar, because they found all kinds of, they found pieces of burned clothing, you know, corset stays and jewelry and so forth, which had belonged to the members of the family.
But no bodies.
One finger.
And so he said in his report that they had been destroyed by fire and by sulfuric acid.
And that's what everybody believed, and that's what I reported.
And I was wrong.
Along with everybody else.
But in fact, they had been pulled back up from the mine shaft where they were.
because Jurovsky, the chief of the execution squad to be told to destroy the evidence, decided that they were too obvious, that people had seen and heard them.
And he was taking them somewhere else when, in the middle of the night, the next night, the truck got stuck.
And the night was short, Siberia in July.
And the Whites were close.
They could hear the artillery.
And they had to do something, so they dug a grave, it was shallow because they hit rock, and they dumped the bodies in there, and put sulfuric acid in, and then dirt, and then railroad ties on top, and more dirt, and it was a pretty helter-skelter, hit-or-miss thing, but it worked.
Nobody saw them again until 1979.
And then the people who discovered them had to be
They discovered them, they took, they dug up, they took three skulls out of the grave, uh, hoping that they could find somebody who would help them validate the skulls.
But, you know, all of the scientists and all of the laboratories were government, and, uh, Abdonan kept the skull that he thought was Nicholas under his bed for a year.
It turned out not to be.
A year later, they went out and buried it again, and said, uh, uh, we will pass this knowledge on down to Alexander Abdonin's son, and to his son, whatever, until it's, uh, times change.
Well, times have changed to the point where they're considering canonization, which is amazing.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
That's the only, uh, decision that the government, or that the church, really...
the government will do whatever the church recommends has to make.
Amazing.
You know, I've often looked at this story, and I'm sure you could agree that it's like all of a sudden discovering what happened to Amelia Earhart, you know, one of these mysteries that has captivated people.
Well, that's true.
That and the linked mystery of Anna Anderson.
You know, Amelia Earhart, I did read somewhere, you know, some
explanation of the really nonsensical... She was flying... Well, she was a terrible navigator, right?
Well, yeah, and she was flying east into the rising sun over water and with enough fuel for about an hour after sunrise.
And here she is looking for this little, tiny fly speck in the middle of the Pacific Ocean with the sun in her eyes.
Wasn't there a guy with her?
Yeah, that's right.
He was an alcoholic.
And all this business about her being captured by the Japanese because she was photographing one of the marshals of the Marianas or something.
I mean, that was nonsense.
She went down at sea.
I used to call it in the Navy fuel exhaustion.
Interestingly, I mean, this is how sort of...
When I went down to see Maples, this guy in Gainesville, where he was peaceful here.
One of the people who came to supper was a guy named Addison Pound, who had made some money because his family owned real estate around Gainesville, and they'd sold, you know, these were scrub pines, and now it was valuable.
Addison Pound had been a Navy aviator,
on either the Lexington or the Saratoga, which was ordered to look for Amelia Earhart.
And he was, he had, I think he'd been to the Naval Academy, he was an ensign.
But he helped plot the search, you know, they did sort of, not quadrants, but whatever like this.
But he said, you know, we were at Pearl Harbor when this happened.
We were sent down there.
We didn't get there until ten days later.
And then they, you know, they flew out like this and over like this and behind.
Every day for a week, because I guess the president had told them to.
Yeah, well, anyway, it's almost like, you think, but...
with this particular story.
Yeah, it's a great, great story.
One of these unsolved mysteries, to coin a phrase.
What's your schedule, by the way?
I have nothing to do after this.
There are, of course, many squabbles among descendants.
You can have a Russian story without a lot of... It's almost like I'm a Greek.
It's a tall story.
The other Greeks, too.
Well, the Russians are
got it from the Greeks.
They got their religion from the Greeks.
The guy who went with me, Peter Serendinaki, is a Greek whose family went to Russia about 150 years ago.
He was a ship captain, and he became an admiral and a Russian navy.
Then they became a great Russian, not a great, but a significant Russian family.
And he married Masha Tolstoy, whose great-grandfather was Leo Tolstoy.
They live across the river from me, and they're, you know, Masha did all of the, she did all the transcriptions from Russian.
Yeah, you did about a hundred interviews, I think?
Yeah.
What were some of the most significant things that you learned in the one-on-one?
Well, I think, you know, I spent five days with Adonin.
He described finding the graves.
I was very much helped by Maples, who was a very unusual scientist who overreached, did a great job, and had a chance to read the book yet, but did a great job in identifying bones in Siberia.
And then he totally screwed up, because he got involved in DNA, sort of
authentication, which he wasn't qualified to do.
I mean, he really wanted to be careful how to say this, because Random House lawyers looked over what I said, but he was greedy for fame, and he tried, and he unwisely attacked Peter Gill, and he doesn't have the competence to do that, but he was significant.
Solovyov, this Russian investigator, sort of a totally dedicated
A guy like Javert in Les Miserables was impressive.
I was very impressed by Nicholas Romanov, the elderly but still very wise and tolerant prince.
The guy who said, I don't want to go back and they shouldn't invite any of us back.
I was just about to say, do any of them harbor any thoughts about, you know, going back and reading?
Well, I mean, Maria does.
This woman does.
She looks like he's playing a role.
Well, he's not a bad little boy.
He's doing what he's been brought up to do, and Maria's doing what she was brought up to do.
And it's really, she hasn't got any of the sort of substance that her distant cousin Nicholas has.
And Nicholas and the other males think that she's pretentious and even ridiculous, but they can't just make her go away.
And she is actively campaigning for... That's how the Russians mean it.
Well, that's what Nicholas says, and that's what the guy... It's like the Greek said, the last thing I heard that he was nothing.
The king will come back, yeah.
We don't have enough problems.
You know, here in Moscow, he said, the growth industry is steel doors.
Yeah, and security businesses, I think.
Yeah, and all these guys walking around like Al Capone.
I don't want to take up too much of your time, because I know I have a book which speaks for itself.
You're working on
Well, I was working on it.
And Bob Massey hasn't... What can I say?
I don't know.
I will certainly go back and work on that now because the contract still exists and it was set aside for this.
I might do something else if...
something else presents itself that I want to do as much as this.
And I'm not being coy, honestly.
I don't know.
I would be happy going back and doing that.
But this gave me... I remarried about four years ago.
I have a three-year-old.
That's given me a new sense of I'm not quite through yet.
And I figure I still have another trip around with my tape recorder.
if I can find the right subject.
But I will finish Dreadnought eventually, because it's too good a story not to.
And you will take it up to weight, up to how far?
Well, originally, that's the point.
It was really supposed to be one book, and Dreadnought got pretty long in it.
What I wanted to do was the, what I saw originally was the arms race and the irony of all of the diplomatic havoc that this German decision to build a fleet caused.
of dragging Britain out of splendid isolation and into alliance with France and Russia, and thereby, in effect, dooming Germany by building these ships and scaring the British, who had to have naval supremacy.
They met once in Jutland.
I mean, there were some preliminary battles there, but the main fleets met once.
There was an indecisive,
But the Germans never came out again.
And two and a half years later, the German fleet was interned and then scuttled itself.
You know, here are all of Kaiser's beautiful toys going bo-bo-bo-bo-bo-bo-bo-bo-bo-bo.
And then a year later, because the world was totally different, the United States had begun building a major fleet, which incorporated all of the latest post-Jutland technology.
The British, who were broke, agreed to the, what was called the 553 Naval Treaty.
Britain and the United States could have, with Japan.
So we could each have 15 battleships and the Japanese could have 10.
And that meant scrapping 35 dreadnoughts that the British had built.
So all of this stuff which had been built with the blood and sweat and
tax money of the British taxpayers were sent off and carved up in the scrap metal.
And I wanted to do that as a kind of irony.
What happened was that I got very involved with all of the politics of Bismarck and Asquith and Irvine and what's his name?
Sir Edward Gray.
So the book got longer, and the theme of the Dreadnaughts got sort of
layered and all this other stuff.
Well, you wrote about 84 mini-biographies.
Yeah.
I did.
I'm very happy that the book was the way it was, but it was hard for anybody but a serious reader like you to deal with, because they didn't quite know what they were reading.
I mean, there was an angry review in the Chicago Tribune by a Rear Admiral.
He doesn't even mention the dreadnought until page 484.
You know, the guy picks up the book, he wants to see Grey Steel.
And then the Random House sales staff, when that book was, you know, to follow the metaphor, being launched and was on the kind of thing you were talking about.
They said, this is a terrible title.
Nobody could know what it means.
It sounds nasty.
Dreadnought.
And I can't disagree more.
I said to Loomis, I'll change it, just as you said, if you can come up with something better.
So Loomis said, well, what about, you know... Battleship.
No, he said, The King and the Kaiser.
I said, that sounds like a soap opera.
I mean, I was trying to be nice.
He said, well, what about...
Supremacy at Sea.
I said, that sounds like a Bodice River, you know.
And I was pretty sure, you know, when I finished Nicholas and Alexandra, Atheneum refused to let me call it that.
They said, nobody will know who they are.
Nobody's ever heard of them.
It was true in those days.
It was like writing a book and calling it, I can't think of a...
because everybody knows who George and Martha are, but, you know, two people by first names that nobody's ever heard of.
If you say, oh, you mean Nicholas II, the last czar, and his wife, who was called Alexandra.
So I said, yeah, but I'm not going to, they wanted to call it the last days of, or the decline.
And so what we did was what they wanted you to do.
I got Nicholas and Alexandra, but it has a fairly large type of,
subtitle, so that the guy... Now, not only is it well-known, but it's being ripped off.
Everybody... I mean, it's a book out now of pictures called The Lost World of Nicholas and Alexandra.
And, of course, you can't copyright a title.
You can't copyright a title.
But that's kind of a compliment, too.
Yeah, well, it's a kind of... You know, if somebody is chasing your wife, that's a kind of compliment, too.
Would you inscribe this for me, sir?
Thank you.